hello everyone welcome to the next
lecture in theory of computation and in
this lecture we will be discussing about
regular languages we will be seeing what
are regular languages and what are not
regular languages all right so let's get
started so what is a regular language a
language is said to be a regular
language if and only if some finite
State machine recognizes it so what is
this mean in the previous lectures we
have seen many examples of finite set
machine particularly DFA where we have
designed particular DFAS and we saw that
there were certain languages that were
accepted or recognized by the DFA or the
finite State machines so if we are able
to design a language using a finite
State machine that is if the finite
State machine recognizes that language
then that language is said to be a
regular language language okay so if we
know what regular languages are the next
question that arises is so what
languages are non regular so the
languages that are not regular are the
languages which are not recognized by
any
FSM and which requires memory so we see
that when a language is not recognized
by any FSM then that is not a regular
language but when is a language not
recognized by any FSM a language will
not be recognized by any FSM when that
language requires memory and why is a
language that requires memory not
recognized by an FSM that is because we
have already studied in the first
lectures that memory of FSM is very
limited and it cannot store or count
strings we know that the memory of FSM
is very limited the only kind of memory
it has is the memory to store in what
state it is currently present that is
only kind of memory it has it doesn't
have any other kind of memory so its
memory is very limited and also it
cannot store or count strings so the
languages that requires memory or the
languages that requires storing or
counting of strings cannot be designed
or recognized using a finite State
machine making it a language that is not
regular all right so I hope that was
clear so so let us take a few examples
to make it more clear for example
suppose I have a language of this form a
b a b b followed by a b a b b so what is
the rule that this language follows the
rule that this language follows is that
the first five letters a b a b b is
repeated again a b a b b so these five
letters should be
repeated exactly the same thing should
be repeated again that is the kind of
rule this language follows so let us see
if this can be designed using a final
set machine or not we see that in order
to repeat what was here over here we
need a memory which stores the
information about this string right only
if we know what is stored here only if
we have the information about this then
only we can repeat it over here but we
know that finite State
machine has a very limited memory so it
cannot store this part in memory so as
to repeat it again over here so this
cannot be designed using a finite State
machine making it a language that is not
regular okay now let me take another
example in this example I have another
language of this form a power n b power
n now what is the meaning of this this
means that the number of A's should be
equal to the number of B's so suppose I
have a a a 3 A's then it should be
followed by B B B Three Bs
because n should be same that means the
number of A's and number of B should be
exactly same so if I have written Three
A's here I I should write three Bs
following it so suppose I have 4 A's 1 2
3 4 then I should also have four
B right the number of
A's here should be exactly equal to the
number of B's so this language also
cannot be recognized by a finite set
machine why that is because in order to
repeat the same number of b as a number
of A's I need to keep count of how many
A's were written first
right if I wrote 3 a then I I need to
keep account that yes a was three then
only I can repeat three number of B here
also I need to keep account that I had
four a then only I can repeat four
number of BS but we have already said
that it cannot count strings finite
State machine cannot keep a count so
this also cannot be recognized by a
finite State machine thus it is not a
regular language
so in the first example we saw an
example where we had to store the
strings we need a memory to store this
part which could not be done so this was
not a regular language and in the second
example we needed to keep the count of
strings in order to
repeat the following strings in this
kind of language so these two languages
since it requires memory for storing and
counting it cannot be designed or
recognized using the final State machine
make making it a language that is not
regular all right so the example of
regular languages are many as we have
already discussed in the previous
lectures in the examples and these were
the examples of two languages that are
non regular so I hope that made the
concept of regular languages and the
languages that are not regular clear to
us so thank you for watching and see you
in the next one
[Music]